=head1 Exim Development Repository

This is the Exim (Mail Transport Agent) Development Repository. Please
read the following information if you wish to use or contribute to the
Exim development process - this is to prevent your or our time being
unnecessarily wasted.

If you just want to use, build or get information on Exim then have a
look at the pointers further down this file at L<General Exim Information>.

=head2 General Development Information

The general Exim development process and resources are documented in
the wiki page at L<http://wiki.exim.org/EximDevelopment> - although
the wiki is likely to be moved and rehashed in the near future.

The sections below this duplicate much of the information form the
wiki document.

=head2 Development Repositories

Exim development is kept within a  git (L<https://git-scm.com/>)
repository. The master repository is at L<git://git.exim.org/exim.git>
with a web interface giving change and source visibility at
L<https://git.exim.org/exim.git>

There is a secondary repository on github at
L<https://github.com/Exim/exim> managed by the Exim Organisation
- however this may currently fall out of synchronisation with the
main one.

=head2 Bug Tracking

Currently this is all done using Bugzilla at L<https://bugs.exim.org/>
- please do not use github issue tracking.

=head2 Mailing List

Development issues are normally discussed on the exim-dev mailing list
- see L<https://www.exim.org/maillist.html>

=head2 Exim Release Process

Some documentation on the release process can be found at
L<http://wiki.exim.org/EximRelease>.

=head2 General Exim Information

The best place to get general information is on the website at
L<https://www.exim.org/>.

You can find Download locations L<https://www.exim.org/mirrors.html>,
Mailing list info L<https://www.exim.org/maillist.html> and Full
Documentation L<https://www.exim.org/docs.html> on that website.

If you are using a Linux or other freely available Unix like operating
system it is very likely that your system will have Exim packaged for
it already. In this case it is probably prudent to use these packages
unless you have specialised requirements.

In any case you can always ask on the
Exim Users mailing list L<https://lists.exim.org/mailman/listinfo/exim-users>
for further information.

[End]
